Dimensions of Mind PerceptionHeather M. Gray,* Kurt Gray, Daniel M. WegnerW hat kinds of things have minds? An-swers to this question often hinge onperceptions. Turing (1) held that acomputer has a mind if a perceiver can’t tell thatit is not human, and Dennett (2) has proposedthat every mind is defined as such in the eye ofthe beholder. But to date, it has generally beenassumed that mind perception occurs on onedimension—things simply have more or lessmind—and the dimensions of mind perceptionhave remained unexamined. Studies testingwhether chimpanzees perceive minds (3) andwhether children or people with autism have thisability (4) use a variety of indicators but have notexplored whether minds are perceived along oneor more dimensions. We studied the structure ofmind perception through 2399 completed surveyson the Mind Survey Web site (5).Each survey called for 78 pairwise comparisonson five-point scales of 13 characters for one of 18mental capacities (e.g., capacity to feel pain) or forone of six personal judgments (e.g., “which char-acter do you like more?”). The charactersincluded seven living human forms (7-week-oldfetus, 5-month-old infant, 5-year-old girl, adultwoman, adult man, man in a persistent vegetativestate, and the respondent him- or herself), threenonhuman animals (frog, family dog, and wildchimpanzee), a dead woman, God, and asociable robot (Kismet). So, for example, onesuch comparison involved rating whether a girlof 5 is more or less likely to be able to feel painthan is a chimpanzee. The survey samples werelargely independent; 2040 unique respondentscontributed data. Participants with many back-grounds responded but averaged 30 years of ageand were modally female, white, unmarried,Christian, Democrat, and with some collegeeducation (6).Mind perception dimensions were identifiedby computing character means for each mentalcapacity survey and submitting the correlationsbetween capacities across characters to principalcomponents factor analysis (varimax rotation).The rotated solution accounted for all 18 capac-ities (extraction communalities ranged from 0.82to 0.99), explained 97% of rating variance, andyielded two factors with eigenvalues over 1.0.A factor we termed Experience (eigenvalue =15.85) accounted for 88% of the variance andincluded 11 capacities (from highest loading):hunger, fear, pain, pleasure, rage, desire, per-sonality, consciousness, pride, embarrassment,and joy. A second factor, Agency (eigenvalue =1.46), accounted for 8% of the variance andincluded seven capacities: self-control, moral-ity, memory, emotion recognition, planning,communication, and thought. Characters’ fac-tor scores on these dimensions (Fig. 1) revealinteresting features; for example, God wasperceived as having much Agency but littleExperience.Personal judgments of the characters wererelated to the mind perception dimensions. Somejudgments were related to both Experience andAgency and suggest that, with the progressionfrom no mind (bottom left) to adult human mind(top right), characters become more highly valued.Thus, both dimensions correlated with liking for acharacter, wanting to save it from destruction,wanting to make it happy, and perceiving it ashaving a soul (r ranging from 0.38 to 0.72). Suchintegrated use of the dimensions in valuing mindscan account for the traditional conceptualization ofmind as perceptible along a single dimension.However, the remaining judgments showeddiffering correlations with the two dimensions.Deserving punishment for wrongdoing (“If bothcharacters had caused a person’s death, which onedo you think would be more deserving of pun-ishment?”) correlated more with Agency (r = 0.82)than Experience (r = 0.22, z = 2.86, P < 0.05),whereas desire to avoid harming (“If you wereforced to harm one of these characters, whichone would it be more painful for you to harm?”)correlated more with Experience (r = 0.85) thanAgency (r = 0.26, z = 2.10, P < 0.05). The di-mensions thus relate to Aristotle’s classical dis-tinction between moral agents (whose actions canbe morally right or wrong) and moral patients(who can have moral right or wrong done tothem). Agency is linked to moral agency andhence to responsibility, whereas Experience islinked to moral patiency and hence to rights andprivileges. Thus, our findings reveal not one di-mension of mind perception, but two, and showthat these dimensions capture different aspects ofmorality.References and Notes1. A. Turing, Mind 59, 433 (1950).2. D. Dennett, Kinds of Minds (Basic, New York, 1996).3. D. Premack, G. Woodruff, Behav. Brain Sci. 1, 515 (1978).4. S. Baron-Cohen, Mindblindness (MIT Press, Cambridge,MA, 1995).5. Mind Surveys, http://mind.wjh.harvard.edu/.6. Materials and methods are available as supportingmaterial on Science Online.7. We acknowledge J. Bradshaw, J. Hromjak, K. Kassam,P. Piff, and B. Simpson and funding from National Instituteof Mental Health grants MH-49127 and MH-71053 and froma Social Sciences and Humanities Research CouncilFellowship.Supporting Online Materialwww.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/315/5812/619/DC1Materials and MethodsTable S129 August 2006; accepted 2 November 200610.1126/science.1134475BREVIADepartment of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 KirklandStreet, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:hgray@wjh.harvard.eduFig. 1. Adjusted character factor scores on the dimensions of mind perception. PVS, persistentvegetative state.www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 315 2 FEBRUARY 2007 619
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/315/5812/619/DC1
Supporting Online Material for
Dimensions of Mind Perception
Heather M. Gray,* Kurt Gray, Daniel M. Wegner
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: hgray@wjh.harvard.edu
Published 2 February 2007, Science 315, 619 (2007)
DOI: 10.1126/science.1134475
This PDF file includes:
Materials and Methods
Table S1
Supporting On-line Material for
Dimensions of Mind Perception
Heather M. Gray, Kurt Gray, and Daniel M. Wegner
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 Kirkland St., Cambridge, MA 02138
Includes:
Materials and Methods
Supplementary Table
2
Materials and Methods
Mind Survey
Respondents saw photos and vignettes on the characters in random order (Appendix
A), and selected a survey from a set of descriptions of 18 mental capacities or 6 personal
judgments (Appendix B). For the survey, images and descriptions of the two characters
to be compared appeared with a five-point scale anchored by “Much more this one”
below each image, “Slightly more this one” next, and “Both equally” between the
images. Respondents also supplied demographic information and made 7-point Likerttype
ratings on religious belief (“I consider myself to be strongly religious” and “I believe
that God exists”) and afterlife belief (“I believe that people whose bodies are dead
continue to live on spiritually”). On survey completion, respondents were shown how
their rank ordering of the characters compared with the mean of others who had
completed the same survey.
Respondents
Recruitment occurred through links to the Mind Survey from other research groups
in social and moral psychology and sites offering comprehensive lists of web-based
psychology studies. There were roughly 3,400 instances of surveys launched, but about
25% of these were not completed. Data from the remaining 2,399 completed surveys
were analyzed. Respondents included 64% females and 36% males; 1% Native
American, 5% Asian, 4% Black, 4% Hispanic, 78% White, 3% multi-racial, and 4%
“other.” Respondents ranged in age from 12 to 75, with a mean of 30.44 years (SD =
12.27). The majority (70%) identified as Christian, with 5% Jewish, 1% Hindu, 1%
Muslim, 3% “other,” and 19% no religion. Education groups included 23% with high
3
school diploma or less, 31% with some college, 19% with undergraduate degree, and
25% with some post-graduate work or a graduate degree. Political affiliation included
36% Democrat, 18% Independent, 20% Republican, and 26% none of these (many of
whom were non-US respondents). Individuals could choose to complete more than one
survey or the same survey more than once. Multivariate analyses of variance examining
the influence of demographics on survey choice revealed no consistent group biases in
survey selection.
Analytic Strategy
For each survey, each character appeared in 12 different comparisons, and mean
relative ratings were computed for each character across all respondents to that survey.
We merged data sets from the 18 mental capacity surveys to compute correlations
between mental capacities across the characters, and submitted these to principal
components factor analysis with varimax rotation (see Supplementary Table for factor
loadings). We used the regression approach to estimate factor scores for each character;
these appear in Figure 1. (For ease of interpretation, factor scores in Figure 1 were
adjusted to be anchored at 0 and 1.)
Relationship between Dimensions of Mind and Personal Judgments
We computed scores for each character as described above on data from the 6
personal judgments (see Appendix B). Then, we computed correlations between these
means and Experience and Agency factor scores across the 13 survey characters.
Individual Differences in Dimensions of Mind
We examined the role of individual-difference variables by partitioning
respondents according to 9 variables: gender, age, strength of religious beliefs, attainment
4
of college education, political affiliation (Democrat or Republican), marital status,
parental status, dog ownership, and strength of belief in a spiritual afterlife. Median splits
were made for the 3 continuous variables (age, strength of religious beliefs, and belief in
a spiritual afterlife) so that all variables had 2 levels. We then computed means for each
character for each level of the individual-difference variable (e.g., men versus women).
We used factor score coefficients from the omnibus factor analysis to estimate scores on
Experience and Agency separately for each group, and then calculated the difference in
factor scores between the two groups. We divided the difference scores by the standard
error for the difference to produce z-statistics.. Of 234 z-statistics (13 characters × 9
individual difference variables × 2 factors), 23 were statistically significant. Respondents
reporting stronger belief in a spiritual afterlife attributed less Agency to the girl,
chimpanzee, dog, woman, man, infant, and self—and greater Agency to God. Afterlife
beliefs also increased perceptions of Experience in the girl and infant. Respondents
indicating stronger religious beliefs saw less Agency in “earthly” characters—
chimpanzee, dog, girl, and woman (but not man)—and more Agency in God. And
compared to Democrats, Republicans perceived the fetus and God higher in Agency; and
the robot, girl, chimpanzee, and woman (but not man) lower in Agency.
5
Supplementary Table
Factor Loadings of Mental Capacities
Factor
Mental Capacity Experience Agency
Hunger .97 .15
Fear .93 .31
Pain .89 .41
Pleasure .85 .51
Rage .78 .58
Desire .76 .64
Personality .72 .68
Consciousness .71 .69
Pride .71 .69
Embarrassment .70 .65
Joy .67 .60
Self-control .18 .97
Morality .35 .93
Memory .33 .91
Emotion recognition .54 .83
Planning .55 .82
Communication .66 .74
Thought .68 .73
6
Appendix A: Character Descriptions and Images
Green frog. The Green Frog can be found throughout eastern North America. This classic
"pond frog" is medium-sized and green or bronze in color. Daily life includes seeking out
permanent ponds or slow streams with plenty of vegetation.
Charlie. Charlie is a 3-year-old Springer spaniel and a beloved member of the Graham
family.
Toby. Toby is a two-year-old wild chimpanzee living at an outdoor laboratory in Uganda.
7 week fetus. At 7 weeks, a human fetus is almost half an inch long--roughly the size of a
raspberry.
Nicholas Gannon. Nicholas is a five-month-old baby.
Samantha Hill. Samantha is a five-year-old girl who lives with her parents and older
sister Jennifer.
Sharon Harvey. Sharon Harvey, 38, works at an advertising agency in Chicago.
Todd Billingsly. Todd Billingsly is a thirty-year-old accountant who lives in New York
City.
7
You. When you see the mirror, please consider how you, yourself, would compare with
the other choice presented.
Gerald Schiff. Gerald Schiff has been in a persistent vegetative state (PVS) for the past
six months. Although he has severe brain damage--Gerald does not appear to
communicate with others or make purposeful movements--his basic bodily functions
(such as breathing, sleeping, and circulation) are preserved.
Delores Gleitman. Delores Gleitman recently passed away at the age of 65. As you
complete the survey, please draw upon your own personal beliefs about people who have
passed away.
God. Many people believe that God is the creator of the universe and the ultimate source
of knowledge, power, and love. However, please draw upon your own personal beliefs
about God.
Kismet. Kismet is part of a new class of “sociable” robots that can engage people in
natural interaction. To do this, Kismet perceives a variety of natural social signals from
sound and sight, and delivers his own signals back to the human partner through gaze
direction, facial expression, body posture, and vocal babbles.
8
Appendix B: Survey Descriptions
Mental Capacities
Communication. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
conveying thoughts or feelings to others.
Consciousness. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
having experiences and being aware of things.
Desire. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of longing
or hoping for things.
Embarrassment. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing embarrassment.
Emotion Recognition. This survey asks you to judge which character is more
capable of understanding how others are feeling.
Fear. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of feeling
afraid or fearful.
Hunger. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of feeling
hungry.
Joy. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing joy.
Memory. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
remembering things.
Morality. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of telling
right from wrong and trying to do the right thing.
9
Pain. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing physical or emotional pain.
Personality. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
having personality traits that make it unique from others.
Planning. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
making plans and working toward goal.
Pleasure. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing physical or emotional pleasure.
Pride. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing pride.
Rage. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
experiencing violent or uncontrolled anger.
Self control. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
exercising self-restraint over desires, emotions, or impulses.
Thought. This survey asks you to judge which character is more capable of
thinking.
Personal Judgments
Destruction. This survey asks you to imagine an event that would destroy all traces
of the characters' existence. If there were an event that would otherwise destroy
all traces of both characters' existence, but you could choose to save one of
them, which character would you choose to save?
Happiness. This survey asks you to imagine that you could somehow make one of
10
the characters happy. If you could somehow make one only of these characters
happy, which one would you choose to make happy?
Harm. This survey asks you to imagine having to harm one of the characters. If
you were forced to harm one of these characters, which one would it be more
painful for you to harm?
Liking. This survey asks you to indicate which character you like more. Which
character do you like more?
Punishment. This survey asks you to imagine having to punish one of the
characters for causing a person's death. If both characters had caused a person's
death, which one do you think would be more deserving of punishment?
Soul. This survey asks you to decide which character is more likely to have a soul.
Which character do you think is more likely to have a soul?